---
title: "Detachment from Externals"

tags:
  - techniques
  - emotions
  - attachment
  - internal-vs-external
  - control
  - reason
  - equanimity
  - fate
  - indifferents
---

<div style="text-align:center;">
  <img style="width:100%;max-width:300px" alt="An abstract watercolor illustration evoking the concept of detachment from externals." :src="$withBase('/images/detachment-externals.webp')">
</div>

# Detachment from Externals

Cultivate a sense of **detachment from external things** like wealth, status,
and even physical health. View these as "indifferent" to your true happiness.
Yes, [they can be preferred](preferred-dispreferred-indifferents.md), but they
should ultimately be indifferent because they are not totally under your
control. By maintaining indifference to these externals, you reduce the
emotional highs and lows that come with attachment. For example, if you lose
money, remind yourself that wealth is neither good nor bad in itself and it does
not affect moral worth.

Reflect on the fleeting nature of externals. Everything that is not directly
under your control (including your possessions, social standing, and even
relationships) can be lost at any moment. Recognize that those things might not
always be there and you will realize how misguided it is to place your happiness
in them. [Mentally prepare for loss or adversity](negative-visualization.md)
before it occurs. Then, you will be able to face them with [emotional
resilience](emotional-resilience.md). Externals do not define you, so they
should not affect your [inner tranquility](inner-peace.md).

Remember that externals are neither good nor bad. They are indifferent to the
ultimate goal of a virtuous life. Gaining external things is not good if they
distract you from your moral purpose. Losing something is not a misfortune
unless you let it disturb you. View externals as indifferent to prevent them
from controlling your emotions. It is not about avoiding engagement with the
world, but about maintaining control over your inner
[happiness](happiness-flourishing.md).
