---
title: "Dichotomy of Control"

tags:
  - control
  - acceptance
  - practices
  - resilience
  - reason
  - perspective
  - internal-vs-external
  - indifferents
---

# Dichotomy of Control

There is a sharp line between what is **within your control** and what is
**outside your control**. This idea is crucial for living a peaceful life.
Understand what you can and cannot control to avoid unnecessary suffering. Then,
you can focus on what truly matters.

## What is Within Our Control

The only things fully within your control are your own thoughts, judgments,
desires, and actions. These are the internal workings of your mind, which you
have direct control over. 

Your [interpretations of events](thoughts-judgments.md), the values you assign
to things, and how you mentally react to situations are entirely under your
control. Your [internal desires](desires-aversions.md) (what you pursue or
avoid) are within your control. How you [choose to behave](actions.md), what you
say, and what you do are also directly within your control.

## What is Outside Our Control

Everything external to your thoughts and actions, including external events,
other people’s actions, and the outcomes of your efforts, are outside of your
control. These are influenced by factors beyond your direct influence.

[Natural occurrences](external-events.md) such as the weather, accidents,
illness, and even death are beyond your control. You cannot control [how others
behave](other-peoples-actions-opinions.md), what they say, or what they think of
you. While you can control your actions, [you cannot control the
outcomes](outcomes-our-efforts.md).

### Indifferents

While externals in life are neither good nor bad themselves, sometimes they can
be preferred or dispreferred based on their contribution to living a virtuous
life. These are called [preferred and dispreferred
indifferents](preferred-dispreferred-indifferents.md).

For example, good health is a preferred indifferent. Poverty is a dispreferred
indifferent.

## Practical Implications

Mastering passions and overcoming [destructive
emotions](destructive-emotions.md) are crucial.
[Tranquility](freedom-disturbance.md) comes from [controlling emotions through
reason](emotional-resilience.md). [Freedom](freedom-disturbance.md) comes from
mastering what is within your control. This approach leads to the [acceptance of
reality](freedom-disturbance.md).

The distinction between what is within your control (thoughts, actions, desires)
and what is outside it (external events, others’ actions, outcomes) is key to
living a peaceful life. By focusing on controlling your inner responses and
accepting external events as they happen, you cultivate [emotional
resilience](emotional-resilience.md), [inner freedom](freedom-disturbance.md), and
[lasting peace](freedom-disturbance.md).
