---
title: "The Future"

tags:
  - time
  - mindfulness
  - perspective
  - internal-vs-external
  - attachment
---

# The Future

Anxiety about the future stems from the [fear](fear.md) of an unknown outcome.
Since **the future is beyond your control**, do not let it disturb your peace of
mind. Focus on your [thoughts](thoughts-judgments.md) and [actions](actions.md)
in the [present moment](time-present-moment.md.md). Build [emotional
resilience](emotional-resilience.md) and calmness. Use [negative
visualization](negative-visualization.md) to reduce anxiety.

Your decisions may influence the course of events, but they do not guarantee a
specific outcome. Focus on making [virtuous choices](acting-virtue.md), but also
accept that the outcome is ultimately [beyond your
control](dichotomy-control.md).

The chain of causes and effects in life is far more complex and interconnected
than you can possibly understand. Focus on what you can control, which is your
own character and actions, rather than trying to manipulate the external world.

Take responsibility for your actions and strive for self-improvement. However,
your efforts should be focused on cultivating inner strength,
[wisdom](wisdom.md), and [resilience](emotional-resilience.md), rather than
trying to control external events. This is the way to [inner
freedom](inner-peace.md) regardless of what happens in the external world.

Planning and preparation are important, but be cautious of excessive attachment
to specific outcomes. Make your plans and preparations with [a sense of
detachment](detachment-externals.md), recognizing that the future is always
uncertain. You can increase your chance of a [preferred
outcome](preferred-dispreferred-indifferents.md) by preparing for different
scenarios and being adaptable, but you should also be prepared to accept
whatever outcome arises.

Your efforts to affect the future should be guided by a sense of humility and
recognition of your place within the larger world. Remember there are limits of
your knowledge and control. Cultivate a sense of awe at the beauty of the world
and wonder at its complexity.
